docs: latch develop (#196)
latchbio/latch: docs/source/basics/latch_develop_example.md

   - -             wgs/    
```

## Overview of the variant calling workflow
The data we are working with is part of a long-term evolution experiment by Richard Lenski. The experiment was designed to assess adaptation of _E. coli_. A population was propgated for more than 40,000 generations in a glucose-limited minimal medium that was supplemented with citrate. Sequencing of the populations at differnt time points revealed that that spontaneous citrate-using variant (Cit+) appeared between 31,000 and 31,500 generations, causing an increase in population size and diversity. 

Variant calling is a common workflow used to see
how the population of _E. coli_ changed over time relative to the original population, _E. coli_ strain REL606. Therefore, we will align each of our samples to the _E. coli_ strain REL606 reference genome to determine what differences exist between our reads versus the genome. 

![Upload](../assets/latch-develop-example/variant-calling-wf.png)

Our variant calling pipeline consists of five sequential steps: 
1. Index the reference genome
2. Align reads to reference genome
3. Convert SAM to BAM format 
4. Sort BAM file by coordinates
5. Variant calling

> Correspondingly, the Latch SDK workflow contains five tasks (`_build_index`, `align_reads`, `convert_to_bam`, `sort_bam`, and `variant_calling`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hence, our workflow will contain five tasks: `build_index`, `align_reads`, `convert_to_bam`, `sort_bam`, and `variant_calling`.
```

good practice not to start non-private methods with an underscore

> We've provided the code for the five tasks above for you in the `buggy-wf`, which you will now test and debug! 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've provided some (buggy) code for the five tasks above for you in the `buggy-wf`, which you will now test and debug! 
```

## Testing and Debugging the Workflow 
* First, enter the `buggy-wf` folder and register it to Latch: 

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```console
```

$ ls 
buggy-wf        good-wf         wgs

$ cd buggy-wf

$ latch register --remote .
```

## Defining a test script

> * Before testing the workflow end-to-end, it is helpful to run and test each task individually. To do so, you can create a folder called `scripts`, which contain a Python file that calls each of your task functions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Before testing the workflow end-to-end, it is helpful to run and test each task individually. To do so, create a folder called `scripts`, which will contain Python files that can call your task functions. 
```

> ```
> # Folder structure inside buggy-wf
> .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```console
$ tree .
```

├── Dockerfile
├── README.md
├── scripts

> │   └── main.py

Reviewer: nit but i wouldn't call this `main.py` since this isn't starting an application, would prefer something like `test_tasks.py` or something similar

├── version
└── wf
    ├── __init__.py

>     └── __pycache__

Reviewer: del the pycache and remove it from git if its there

Author: no pycache in git, will del here

        └── __init__.cpython-39.pyc

3 directories, 6 files
```

For example, our `main.py` script can look like: 

```python
# Import task functions from our workflow 

> from wf import _build_index, align_reads, convert_to_bam, sort_bam, variant_calling

Reviewer: rename to `build_index`

from latch.types import LatchFile, LatchDir

# Call task function

> _build_index(ref_genome = LatchFile("latch:///wgs/ref_genome/ecoli_rel606.fasta")) 

Reviewer: rename

```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

As a quick summary,
```

> * The first line imports all tasks from `wf/__init__.py` to `scripts/main.py`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The first line imports all tasks defined in `wf/__init__.py` so that we can reference them in this script
```

> * The second line imports the appropriate Latch types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The second line imports the necessary Latch types
```

> * The third line calls the task function to index the reference genome, `_build_index`. 

Reviewer: rename

![Copy](../assets/latch-develop-example/copy.png)

> * To use a file on Latch as test data to the task, navigate to Latch Console, click on that file and copy the path using the "Copy" button on the sidebar. After copying the path, you can prefix it with `latch://` to specify that it is a file on Latch, and pass the whole string as a parameter to `LatchFile`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

To use a file on Latch as test data to the task, navigate to the Latch Console, click on the specific file and copy the path shown on the sidebar. After copying the path, prefix it with `latch://` to specify that it is a file on Latch, and pass the whole string as a parameter to `LatchFile`. 
```

## Calling the test script 

> * Inside `buggy-wf`, start a devleopment session with: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Inside `buggy-wf`, start a development session by running 
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```console
```

$ latch develop .

> ```
> Output: 
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Copying your local changes...
Could not find /Users/hannahle/Documents/GitHub/simple-variant-calling/buggy-wf/data - skipping
Done.
Successfully connected to remote instance.
Pulling 6064_buggy-wf, this will only take a moment... 
Image successfully pulled.
>>>
```

> * To run the test script, type: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the test script as below:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```console
```

>>> run-script scripts/main.py

> ```
> Output: 
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Syncing your local changes... 
Could not find /Users/hannahle/Documents/GitHub/simple-variant-calling/buggy-wf/data - skipping
Finished syncing. Beginning execution and streaming logs:
Finished downloading ecoli_rel606.fasta

====================
2022-11-17 00:09:13,104 flytekit ERROR Exception occured when executing task: [Errno 2] No such file or directory: 'bwa'
====================
```

> * The logs tell us that there is no file or directory called `bwa`. One potential reason why is we might not have installed the binary `bwa` correctly. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The logs tell us that there is no file or directory called `bwa`. One potential reason why is that we might not have installed the binary `bwa` correctly. 
```

> * To check this, let's open up a shell and check if the `bwa` command exists:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To check this, let's open up a shell and check if the `bwa` command exists:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```console
```

>>> shell

account-4034-development@ip-10-0-11-243:~$ 
```

> which opens up an interactive bash session. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This opens up an interactive bash session into the environment in which our task is running, which we can use just like a normal terminal. Trying to run `bwa` in it yields the following output:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```console
```

account-4034-development@ip-10-0-11-243:~$ bwa
bash: bwa: command not found
```

> * Indeed, our `bwa` binary was not installed properly! 
> * Checking the Dockerfile, we noticed that the installation instruction for `bwa` was commented out. Let's uncomment it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indeed, our `bwa` binary was not installed! Checking the Dockerfile, notice that the installation instruction for `bwa` is commented out. Let's uncomment it:
```

```Dockerfile
...

> RUN apt install bwa

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RUN apt-get install bwa
```

...
```

> * Because we made a modification to our Dockerfile, we have to rebuild the environment and enter a new development session to load in the newest changes. 
> * Exit your current development session: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because we made a modification to our Dockerfile, we have to rebuild the environment and enter a new development session to load in the newest changes. First, exit your current development session: 
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```console
```

account-4034-development@ip-10-0-11-243:~$ exit
>>> exit
Exiting local development session
```

> * Re-register your workflow with the new Docker image

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, re-register your workflow by creating a new docker image using the fixed `Dockerfile`:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```console
```

$ latch register --remote .
```

> * Once your workflow finishes registering, enter a new development session:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, once your workflow finishes registering, enter a new development session and rerun the test script:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```console
```

$ latch develop .

> ```
> * Now, re-run the test script: 
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
...
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```console
```

>>> run-script scripts/main.py
```
Your script should now run successfully!

> **Where are my outputs?**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Where are my outputs?
```

> * Let's inspect the return statement of the `_build_index` task inside `wf/__init__.py`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make sure that our tasks are working properly, lets look at their output files to make sure that they're correct. Where do we find them though? Let's inspect the return statement of the `_build_index` task inside `wf/__init__.py`:
```

```python
@small_task
def _build_index(ref_genome: LatchFile = LatchFile("latch:///wgs/ref_genome/ecoli_rel606.fasta")) -> LatchDir: 
    _bwa_cmd = [
        "bwa", 
        "index",
        ref_genome.local_path
    ]
    subprocess.run(_bwa_cmd)

>     output = os.path.dirname(os.path.abspath(ref_genome.local_path))

Reviewer: this is a python comment but why not use pathlib, its so much more readable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    output = Path(ref_genome.local_path).resolve().parent
```

Author: thanks good point

    return LatchDir(output, "latch:///wgs/ref_genome")
```

> * We can see the task is returning a `LatchDir` with the filepath `latch:///wgs/ref_genome`, which indicates that the output files are located inside the `/wgs/ref_genome` folder on Latch!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can see the task is returning a `LatchDir` with the remote path `latch:///wgs/ref_genome`, which indicates that the output files are located inside the `/wgs/ref_genome` folder in the Latch Console.
```

![Outputs](../assets/latch-develop-example/ref_genome.png)

## Debugging Subsequent Tasks

> * Similarly to how we tested our first task, we can also call the second task from `scripts/main.py` like so: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly to how we tested our first task, we can also call the second task from `scripts/main.py` like so: 
```

```python
from wf import _build_index, align_reads, convert_to_bam, sort_bam, variant_calling
from latch.types import LatchFile, LatchDir

ref_genome_dir = _build_index(ref_genome = LatchFile("latch:///wgs/ref_genome/ecoli_rel606.fasta")) 

> align_reads(ref_genome_dir = ref_genome_dir, read1 = LatchFile("latch:///wgs/trimmed_fastqs/SRR2584863_1.trim.sub.fastq"), read2 = LatchFile("latch:///wgs/trimmed_fastqs/SRR2584863_2.trim.sub.fastq"))

Reviewer: format this code using black pls

```

> * Here, we are passing the output of the first task, `latch:///wgs/ref_genome`, as the input to the second task. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, we are passing the output of the first task, `latch:///wgs/ref_genome`, as the input to the second task. 
```

> * Run the test script: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running the test script yields the following output: 
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```console
```

>>> run-script scripts/main.py

Syncing your local changes... 
Could not find /Users/hannahle/Documents/GitHub/simple-variant-calling/buggy-wf/data - skipping
Finished syncing. Beginning execution and streaming logs:
Finished downloading ecoli_rel606.fasta.amb
Finished downloading ecoli_rel606.fasta.ann
Finished downloading ecoli_rel606.fasta.pac
Finished downloading ecoli_rel606.fasta.sa
Finished downloading ecoli_rel606.fasta
Finished downloading ecoli_rel606.fasta.bwt
['/tmp/flyte-4jp7wtbm/sandbox/local_flytekit/638a02102804a22fa669f18a715b580a/ecoli_rel606.fasta']
====================
2022-11-17 00:42:29,046 flytekit ERROR Exception occured when executing task: Failed to get data from latch:///wgs/trimmed_fastqs/SRR2584863_1.trim.sub.fastq to /tmp/flyte-4jp7wtbm/sandbox/local_flytekit/3b8d7234fe9c7d3e37ec78af9c592208/SRR2584863_1.trim.sub.fastq (recursive=False).

Original exception: failed to get presigned url for `latch:///wgs/trimmed_fastqs/SRR2584863_1.trim.sub.fastq`
====================
```

> * The error tells us that there is no file called `/wgs/trimmed_fastqs/SRR2584863_1.trim.sub.fastq` on Latch. Referencing the actual file paths of the trimmed FastQs, we can see that the filepath is indeeed wrong, with the correct filepath being `/wgs/data/SRR2584863_1.trim.sub.fastq`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This error tells us that there is no file called `/wgs/trimmed_fastqs/SRR2584863_1.trim.sub.fastq` in the Latch Console. Referencing the actual file paths of the trimmed FastQs, we can see that their paths are indeed wrong, with the correct paths being `/wgs/data/SRR2584863_1.trim.sub.fastq`, etc (listed under `/wgs/data` instead of `/wgs/trimmed_fastqs`). 
```

> * We can make this modification to our test script and re-run the task

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can make this modification to our test script and re-run the task as below:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```console
```

>>> run-script scripts/main.py 
```

> * The task now outputs the results to the folder `/results` on Latch!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The task now outputs the results to the folder `/results` on Latch!
```

![Aligned](../assets/latch-develop-example/aligned.png)

## Exercise
As an exercise, you are welcome to continue and debug the final three tasks of the whole workflow. The solution of a working workflow is provided in the `good-wf` folder for reference.

---
## Key Takeaways

> From the tutorial, you learned:

Reviewer: personally don't really like having this at the end of the docs

Reviewer: seems very condescending imo

* How to open a development session with `latch develop`

> * How to open an interactive bash for quick debugging of commands with `shell`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* How to open an interactive bash session for quick debugging of commands with `shell`
```
